>> We differentiate
between healing and curing.
Curing is the
business of medicine.
Curing has to do with
eliminating symptoms.
Healing is the
business of the shaman.
It's what we do in
our training programs,
what we train our students to
do through our Healing the Light
Body School, we're
training Western shamans
that are able to bring about
healing, which is much more
thorough than curing is.
And that frequently
results in curing, as well,
but does not always.
For example, some
of my best clients
die, but they die peacefully.
They die nearly pain-free.
They die consciously.
So healing has to do with
an experience of infinity,
with an experience
of a self that
exists outside of time, that can
never experience illness, that
has never been
touched by disease.
Whereas curing has to do
with eliminating symptoms.
And if you do not address
the root, the cause,
illness is simply
going to return.
My mission is to translate
ancient sacred technologies
into healing practices that
are powerful and effective
in a Western setting.
And these are
methodologies that have
been in existence
for 50,000 years.
They've been proven effective.
They've been transmitted
through the oral tradition,
from teacher to student, from
grandmother to granddaughter,
grandfather to grandson.
And my mission is to bring
these methodologies to the West,
to train Western shamans
in the luminous healing
practices of the Americas.
And today, we're training
people from all cuts of life
to learn to heal themselves,
to learn to heal each other,
and to learn to heal the world.
And this is who the shaman is.
We are caretakers of the Earth.
And my mission is to
train Western shamans that
can dream a dream of healing
and of peace and of beauty
together.
A healer always works
within sacred space.
And the notion that we
work with and our premise
is that we can create
a personal sacred space
by calling on the four
corners of the world,
and on the organizing principles
that each of these four corners
represent.
When we summon them, we
create a space that is safe,
which is an essential
condition for healing to occur.
Many of the clients that
I work with personally
are coming to see me because at
an early stage in their life,
the world ceased to be safe.
And until we can create
an energetic safe space,
a sacred space, healing is
going to be very difficult.
We do this by
summoning on the four
corners of the world, the
four directions, and Heaven
and Earth.
But then we work with creating
a second kind of sacred space.
The first one connects
us to the ecosphere,
to all of the forces of nature.
The second kind of
sacred space connects us
to the noosphere, which is
the distinctly human sphere--
to the medicine men and women,
to the luminous beings that
assist us from the spirit
world, the spiritual teachers,
the angels, the luminous ones.
And we have so much
help available to us.
But they cannot intervene
directly in our world.
Our world is too dense.
So we have to create a
microcosm, a microuniverse,
where they can come and assist
us in our healing processes.
In fact, they end up
doing so much of the work.
Shamanism's an ancient
spiritual and healing practice
found throughout the
Americas and throughout all
traditional cultures in
the world-- in India,
in Tibet, in Russia,
in Central Europe--
and practiced most actively
today in the Americas.
And the shaman is
the individual who
mediates between
Heaven and Earth,
between the visible
and invisible worlds.
The shaman is the
individual who dances
on top of the equal sign in
Einstein's famous equation E
equals mc squared.
He dances between
the world of energy
and between the world of matter.
The shaman is the one who
heals the seas, the one who
propitiates the forces
of nature, the one who
is able to steer the
village and the individual
into a purposeful and
healed and meaningful life.
Western medicine is in
the business of curing.
The shaman is in the
business of healing.
Curing is the
eliminating of symptoms.
And we all know people
that have received cures
but have not
experienced healings.
When that happens, the
symptoms generally return.
The cancer returns.
The malignancy comes back.
When you experience
healing, this
is a transforming experience.
It reflects in every
aspect of your life--
in your relationships,
in your diet,
in your job, in your
marriage, and how you relate
to your children, and in
how you experience illness
and wellness.
What drew me to
the way of shaman
is that it's a practice, a
tradition of the feminine
and of the Earth.
The healing practices
that I was exposed
to in my academic
training were very based
on a masculine approach, as
is all of Western society
and mythology.
Medicine evolved during
war, and even still
had the terminology of
the battlefield, where
we fight the crusade
against cancer,
the battle against
heart disease.
The ways of the
shaman were not based
on developing stronger
antibiotics that could wipe out
the critters that were
invading our organism,
but rather coming into
balance and into peace
with ourselves and
with all of nature.
And when we did so, our own
bodies' healing systems,
our immune system, was
able to maintain us
in states of excellent health.
So the shamanic
healing practices
are founded on enhancing,
on disinhibiting,
the body's own healing response.
What most called
me to the healing
practices were the mastery that
these individuals demonstrated
in transforming what we would
call incurable conditions
in the West, in
assisting people to heal
from deep emotional
wounds that would require
a decade of psychotherapy for
us, all in a period of weeks.
These were methodologies
that did not
rely on a technological fix
or simply chewing mentally
your psychological problems,
but on a deep energetic
intervention that created
transformation in the body
and in the mind and in
the soul-- things that
were miracles in the
domain of miracles.
I was fascinated by
a tradition based
on a profound
communion with nature.
I remember walking in the
jungle one time with a medicine
man and a medicine woman
that I was studying with.
And we came to a clearing,
and they said to me, Alberto,
go to the other side of clearing
and into the rain forest
and see what happens.
And I walked in.
And the jungle is always full
of songs of parrots, of macaws,
of monkeys.
And the first step,
the second step,
full of rich musical tones.
And then the third
step, everything stops.
And they come up to me
and they say, you see?
They know that you've been
kicked out of the garden.
They know that you
don't belong here.
And I look at them and I
said, no, that's ridiculous.
I was convinced that the
animals were smelling
me-- my deodorant, my athlete's
foot powder, my toothpaste.
And I went to
Shipibo Indians who
were cooking a boa on a spit.
And I asked them if I could
have some of the boa fat.
And I stripped
down to my shorts,
and I smeared my body
in boa fat, convinced
that the jungle, I
was sure, was going
to perceive another
serpent slithering back in.
And the first step
was full of song.
The second step and the third
step, everything stops again.
And it wasn't until
15 years later
that I was able to
walk into the jungle
and have it recognize me
as someone who belonged
in the garden, and have a
continuous singing around me.
My work began initially as
a researcher investigating
the mind-body interface.
How does the mind heal the body?
How do we create
psychosomatic health
or psychosomatic disease?
And we were actually
cutting and dicing
and staining the human
brain, and putting it
under the microscope
to look for the mind
until I realized one day
that I was looking out
of the wrong end
of the microscope.
That I needed to look bigger
instead of smaller and smaller.
And I left my laboratory at
San Francisco State University
and went into the
Amazon and the Andes
to work with medicine
women and medicine
men who did not have access
to technology as we did,
who had to rely on the unique
capabilities of the human mind
to heal and transform.
And they became my teachers.
They became my
mentors over 20 years.
And eventually, I stopped
approaching them as a scientist
or as an anthropologist,
and became
a student of the shamans.
I was very blessed to have
a teacher, a mentor, who
came from the traditional
world and was steeped also
in the world of the
West, who really bridged
the 16th with the 21st century.
He was one of the
last of the Inca, came
from the high
mountains of Peru, born
in a village at 17,000 feet.
And made his way to the city
of Cuzco, the ancient capital
of the Inca Empire,
and was raised
in the churches, in
the Catholic churches,
sweeping and cleaning
the churches.
Went to school, and
eventually became a professor
at the university,
of philosophy.
And I traveled with him.
I initially hired him to
come with me as a translator.
And we traveled
throughout the villages
in the highlands of Peru in
search of the great healers--
while, unbeknownst to
me, I was traveling
with one of the greatest
healers, one of the most feared
and loved and respected
healers of the Inca.
And it was only
after nearly a year
of working with him that he
disclosed his other identity.
And I said to
myself, how blessed
I am to have found this man.
And I mentioned that to him
one day, and he said to me,
you know, the Spanish
and the church
has been looking
for us for 500 years
and not been able to find us.
What makes you think
that you could find me?
I am the one who found you.
And whenever I was
in his presence,
I was inside his field, my
perception would open up.
I could perceive the luminous
energy field, the threads
that connected us to each other.
I could sense a
person's history.
And I step two feet away
outside of his field,
and all the perception
would disappear.
So the are like
tuning forks that
can help us fine-tune ourselves.
The principal
reason for mentoring
is that your teacher
helps you to connect
to a lineage of
medicine men and women
that continue to live
in a luminous form,
even though their
physical form has expired.
Without that
connection, all you have
is a body of techniques
without the power of spirit.
When the Spanish
arrived to the Americas,
they brought with
them a mythology
that was uniquely different to
the mythologies of the Earth
peoples.
In fact, it was a
mythology that was
in conflict and contradictory
to the mythologies of the Earth
peoples.
And let me go, for a moment,
into the mythic elements.
For example, the missionaries
brought with them
a mythology that we
had been kicked out
of the garden, when none
of the American mythologies
support this belief.
In fact, the Native
Americans were not
kicked out of the garden.
They were given the garden to be
the stewards and the caretakers
of the garden.
So immediately that
created a hostility
between the conquistador
and the indigenous peoples.
Also the conquistadors
brought with them
a belief that the Earth
was a hostile place.
Because as we're being
cast out of the garden,
there's a voice that
says, and cursed
shall be the Earth
because of you, woman.
And to the man the voice says,
with the sweat of your back,
you will take your
fruit from the Earth,
and it shall grow thorns
and thistles for you.
It doesn't say it shall grow
strawberries and mangoes
and pineapples.
It shall grow
thorns and thistles.
So it establishes a hostile
relationship to the feminine
and to the Earth.
And the traditions of the
peoples of the Americans
were the traditions
of the Earth peoples.
They knew that it was from
the rich, fertile Earth
that all life came from.
And they knew that it was--
that the Earth created
abundance, created-- produced
all of the foods and all
the fruits that allowed us to
live in complete abundance.
But what happened
with the conquest
is that the indigenous
peoples were decimated.
New studies indicate
that there were
over 100 million native
peoples living in the Americas
at the time of the conquest.
And in the first 50 years,
90% of that population
was decimated, primarily
by plagues, by small pox,
by illnesses that were
unknown in the Americas, that
contaminated.
There are studies that
indicate that there
were over 100 million indigenous
people living in the Americas.
50 years after the
conquest, their numbers
had been reduced by 90%.
The decimation that occurred in
the Americas, the genocide that
occurred was
unparalleled to anything
that had happened
previously, and would not
be parallel except
with the genocide that
occurred in World War II.
90 million Americans
decimated by small pox,
by the illnesses
of the Europeans
that were unknown
in the Americas,
and for which the Native
Americans had no defenses for.
So the battle really occurred
in the healing chambers.
And Europeans, you have to
remember, were used to plagues.
They had survived
the Black Plague.
numerous plagues.
And they knew that when you
were struck by a plague,
you had to isolate
the individual,
board them up in their
house, and protect
the rest of the community.
In the Americas,
when you became ill,
the tradition was that
the family sat around you.
The shaman would come and sing
and pray for the ill person.
So disease was communicated
very, very rapidly.
And it devastated the aboriginal
peoples of the Americas.
What disease did not
do, the conquistadors
completed by converting
the indigenous peoples,
decimating their mythology,
their religions, their belief
systems.
The conquistador arrived with
the notion of Heaven and Hell.
And they explained that Heaven
is, of course, the place above.
It's the place of the Holy.
It's the place of the Lord.
When the indigenous
people asked where
Hell was, which is a
very foreign notion
to native peoples, they were
told that Hell was below.
It was the only other
direction that was left.
And it was an
inconceivable notion
because the Native
Americans understood
that it was from the
rich, fertile Earth
that all life came forth,
that this could not
be the place of damnation.
Also very difficult
to understand
was the gender of
the European god,
that was a distinctly
masculine god.
So the decimation
was thorough, was
at the level of the
population, of the culture,
of the religion,
of the traditions.
In North America,
native peoples ended up
being put in concentration
camps, where they still are,
in reservations.
In South America, they
were spared that fate.
But it was a very
thorough decimation
that drove the last of
the remaining shamans
into hiding in
mountaintops in the Andes
at 18,000 feet of
altitude, which
is where I met the shamans
that I have been working
with the last 20 years.
The shamans that I had the
privilege of working with
understood that we have a
luminous energy field that
surrounds the
physical body and that
informs the physical body, that
organizes the physical body
in the same way that the
energy fields of a magnet
will organize iron filings
on a piece of glass.
And that you had to
intervene to heal
the body at the level of
the luminous energy field,
at the level of the blueprint.
That if you only
intervened at the body,
through surgery or
medication, without clearing
the blueprint, that
whatever condition
you were suffering from
would re-express itself.
The luminous energy
field is shaped
like a doughnut, which,
in geometry, the shape is
known as a torus.
And it's a doughnut with
a very narrow hole in it.
So if you can imagine
a flux of energy
coming up through our
feet, through our bodies,
out the very top of
our head, and expanding
the width of our
outstretched arms,
and there's energy flowing
up through the feet,
up to the legs, and down the
outside of the body again
and then up again, and you
rotate that 360 degrees,
you end up with a torus.
This is the shape of
the luminous energy
field when we're in nature.
When we're in a city,
this doughnut of energy
collapses and becomes
very, very tight,
like a cocoon, a
very tight cocoon
around the physical body.
But where we're back in nature
or in our natural states,
it's very expansive.
This luminous
energy field is what
contains the imprints of
our early life experiences,
of genetically-inherited
illnesses,
even of memories before we
were born, when we were still
in the uterus and before.
When we learn to perceive
the luminous energy field,
we learn to perceive the
luminous nature of life.
The visual spectrum,
what the eye can see,
is a very narrow band of the
electromagnetic spectrum--
very, very small.
Most of what's happening
in the universe
is happening outside
of the visual spectrum.
When we learn to perceive
with our inner eyes,
with the eyes that can perceive
the luminous nature of life,
we recognize our
interconnectedness
with all things-- with the
stars, with the rivers,
with the mountains, with the
valleys, with each other,
with the past, and
with our future.
To perceive the
luminous energy field,
we have to part the
veil, so to speak.
We need to break out of the
cultural trance that we've all
been educated
into, that defines,
in a very narrow and limited
way, the nature of reality,
that defines what you can and
cannot do because you were born
a woman, what I can or may not
experience because I was born
a man.
That prescribes
who we are, scripts
who we are, at this
moment in history--
we have to step out
of the cultural trance
that we begin to learn
from kindergarten on.
The luminous energy
field becomes toxic.
When we experience
toxic emotions
that we're not able to
process or cleanse ourselves
from effectively, they begin to
build within our luminous field
like sludge, pools of sludge,
that begin to weaken us,
to debilitate us, to slow
down the flow of the energy
streams in our field, to
make us lethargic, to make
us unconscious, and eventually
to make us-- to deaden us.
Let me give you an
example of this.
I worked with a woman a few
years ago who came to see me.
Her son had died, her
only son, on November 26.
And every November 26, she would
have a near-death experience.
She had let her son go out
with friends, borrow the car.
They had gotten into
an automobile accident.
And she felt completely
responsible for his death.
Every November 26, she would
be in a close call with death.
One time, she was
stopped at a red light,
and a truck rear-ended her.
She ended up in
the emergency room.
Another November 26, she
was eating at a restaurant
and became poisoned by
the fish she was eating,
had to be rushed
to the hospital.
In the emergency room, they
gave her barium to do an exam,
and found out that she
was allergic to barium
when her heart stopped.
And when she came to see
me-- and the third time,
she didn't even leave the house.
And what happened is
that she was plugging
a lamp in and nearly
electrocuted herself.
So she asked me,
Alberto, how can
an imprint in the
luminous energy field
be choreographing my
getting rear-ended,
my getting food
poisoning-- events
that are outside of my world?
And the luminous energy
field organizes our reality.
It will choreograph
our life experience
to recreate the circumstances
of an original wounding
to give us an
opportunity to heal.
Now, most of the time, we're
not able to heal that situation
by recreating a
near-death experience.
She was not able to heal her
grieving and her mourning
for the loss of her son.
In fact, it kept rewounding
her, strengthening the imprint
in the field.
And it was not until we did
an illumination process, which
is our core healing
process, that we were
able to clear the
imprint in the field
and reinform her luminous
energy field-- erase
this imprint so she could then
carry on with her mourning,
and the grieving,
and the healing
from the loss of her son.
The way an imprint
works is that if you
do not to learn the lessons,
if you do not heal them,
you end up marrying them.
A case that illustrates
this is a client
who came to see me who had had
seven significant relationships
in her young life, 31 years old.
And she found that
they all ended up
in the same tragic
matter, through betrayal,
the man was cheating
on her, through loss.
And she had an imprint in
her luminous energy field
that we shrouded around
this theme of abandonment
and betrayal.
What she realized in the
course of her healing is, see,
she had had really
only one relationship,
but with seven different men--
the same relationship repeating
over and over and over again.
And it wasn't until
she healed and cleared
this imprint that she was able
to have a wholesome and healthy
relationship with a man who did
not get set up to betray her,
to act out the programming and
in this imprint in her field.
An imprint is caused by trauma
that is unhealed at the moment.
So whenever we have trauma
that we do not resolve and heal
in the moment, it begins
to organize energies
in the form of a
blueprint, if you want,
of a fingerprint in the
luminous energy field.
It becomes encoded in our field.
It has to charge that is
not released in the moment,
and that is this
charge that's carried
within the cocoon of our field.
It begins to embed itself
to the walls of the field
and becomes a
permanent fixture--
this charge not only
contains energy,
but it also contains information
about the circumstances
around the original wounding.
So whenever this
imprint gets triggered,
that information will spill
into one of our chakras
and take over our
central nervous system.
It will hijack our
central nervous system
and recreate the circumstances
of the original wounding again.
An original wounding can
be caused by child abuse,
whether verbal or
physical, by a sense
of being left in the
world and the world
suddenly stopping to be safe.
Parents might leave a
child to go on a holiday
and leave the
child with Grandma,
but the child feels that
she has been abandoned.
And it's all
subjective, of course.
And that can begin
to shape and form
an imprint which will
continue to bear itself
true throughout that person's
life until they heal it.
So trauma, sometimes
this trauma--
it's always the early
life or intrauterine.
Occasionally it's
previous lives-- the way
we may have died in a
former lifetime, which
becomes imprinted and coded
into our luminous field,
and again continues to
recreate that theme, which
may not necessarily prescribe
the way that we might die now,
but prescribes the way that
we might experience loss
or we might experience hurt.
I'll give you an example
from my own life of what
happens when an
imprint is activated.
I was raised in a
Latin American country,
and there was a
revolution happening
when I was 10 years old.
At that time, we were
terrified that somebody
might come and break
into our house.
There were militiamen
all over the streets.
We had locks on our doors.
And when my father, who was gone
during the day, was not there,
I was the only man in the
house, a 10-year-old little boy,
that had to look after my
mother and my grandmother
and my sister.
So I was terrified.
One time, three militiamen
came to the door, they knocked.
We would not open the door.
They started kicking it in.
And I went to the window, and
I pulled the curtain aside
and I looked out, and I saw
one of the militiamen who
saw this terrified little boy.
I looked into his eyes, and
he turned to the others,
and he said, "Come.
There's no one here.
Let's go."
He saved-- he saved us.
He saved my life.
Well, what happened is that I--
it was such a traumatic moment
for me because I knew that
not only could I have died,
but my family could
have been killed.
That the people that
would come to help me
and to my assistance,
I understood
were also the people that
could hurt me the most.
That became encoded as
an imprint in my life.
So for many years, I was unable
to develop close friendships,
to let anyone too
close or help me
because I knew that they were
the people that could take
my family away, that
could hurt me the most.
I was unable to enter into
an intimate relationship
because if I let
someone in, they
could take everything away.
And I spent years
in psychotherapy,
and I understood the
dynamics perfectly well--
tremendous insight
into my own pathology,
but I could not break
free of the pattern.
I could not allow intimacy
or close friendships.
And it wasn't until I
cleared this imprint
from my luminous
field that I was
able to find people that
could assist me and help me,
and that I could also help.
Because prior to that, I
was a compulsive helper.
I was always providing
assistance to others,
but there was no
one there for me.
So after my own healing, I
was able to suddenly open up
and to receive.
Imprints are the
cause of disease.
Whereas medicine says
that physical disease
results from genetic
predispositions
that you have for heart disease,
for example, or a breast
condition.
What we would say is
that these conditions
are informed by patterns
in your luminous field.
And that if you heal the pattern
before it has the opportunity
to express itself as
a heart condition,
then you do not have to live it.
You do not have to live it out.
So from the world
view of the healer,
the information in the
luminous energy field
is the cause of illness.
It's that genetic blueprint that
is energetic-- not molecular,
like we think the genetic
blueprint exists exclusively.
In fact, it's the
luminous energy field
that informs DNA that then
informs the physical body.
So the implications here
are that we can not only
heal disease that we may
have inherited genetically,
but that we can
consciously influence
the expression of our genes and
participate in our evolution.
We can create new bodies
that age differently,
that heal differently,
and that die differently.
The traditions that
we work are traditions
in which an individual
learns that they
can dream with their eyes open,
so that the dream time not been
stuffed into this domain of
sleep like it has in the West.
In fact, we live
in the dream time.
We dream the world into being.
In the same way that we are
able to create and craft
a new body that
ages differently,
we're able to create and craft
and dream a world into being,
a personal world, in which we
live in harmony with nature,
with ourselves,
with our families.
We're able to interact with the
organizing principles of life
and actually participate
in the process of creation.
When we don't dream
our world into being,
we have to settle for a
dream that was dreamt for us
by the culture that says
that this is what you're
capable of doing as a woman.
These are the life
experiences you're
capable of having as a man.
This is how long it takes
to heal from this condition.
It takes 30 days
to heal from this.
And when you're able
to dream in the sense
that we speak of
dreaming, you're
able to break out
of a cultural trance
that we've all been
educated into that scripts
and prescribes the
nature of reality,
generally in a very
narrow and limiting way.
Shamans don't
diagnose, they heal.
In the West, we
diagnose, and then we
have prescribed
interventions that
have to be performed in
exactly the same way,
regardless of who
has the diagnosis.
Chronic fatigue is widespread
throughout America,
and it is intimately connected
to our disassociation
with nature.
The more we connect with
nature and with our own nature,
the more that we are able
to be replenished by sources
that are not limited
to ourselves.
We're able to come into a
fuller energetic exchange
with the Earth and
with the environment.
So this is a condition that is
very readily-- responds very
well to energy medicine.
The chakras are the organs
of the luminous energy field.
In the same way that we have
physical organs in the body,
we have luminous organs
in our energy field.
And they are vortexes
of energy that
spin in a clockwise direction
that are shaped like a funnel.
And the wide mouth of the funnel
extends two or three inches
outside our body, whereas
the narrow tip of the funnel
extends into the body
and connects directly
to the spinal cord.
So the chakras inform our
neurophysiology directly.
So when you have the
information in an imprint, when
it's triggered, it's activated,
it spills its contents
into a chakra that then informs
our central nervous system
directly.
It hijacks our central
nervous system.
It's like when you
have a computer,
you have a small icon
in your computer,
and it's only when
you double-click on it
that that icon takes
over your screen.
Well, imprints remain dormant
in the luminous energy field
until they get double-clicked.
And then when they
do, they hijack
our central nervous system.
And they get double-clicked
when our buttons get pushed,
when we get
emotionally triggered,
when we become reactive in life.
When we become reactive,
it's a sure sign
that there's an imprint that
has taken over and it's at play.
We lose consciousness.
We're no longer in
the driver's seat.
I no longer see you, but I
see a version of my mother.
I no longer see this man, but I
see the father that I never had
and that I'm jealous of.
So we begin to project
our internal reality out
into the world, onto innocent
people that have simply
triggered an unconscious
program in us.
People ask me, do Native
Americans have chakras?
I thought that the
chakras were Hindu.
And I ask them, well, do
Africans have kidneys?
I thought that
kidneys were European.
And of course chakras are
part of our luminous anatomy,
and they're universal.
And each of the chakras has
a theme associated with it.
But in our system, in
the Native Americas,
we work with nine
chakras, seven of which
are within the
physical body, one,
the eighth chakra is
within the luminous body
but outside the physical
body, and the ninth chakra
is completely outside
the physical body
and the luminous body.
It's at the center
of the universe.
It's that notion that
we call God in the West.
So the themes, very
briefly, of the chakras,
are the first one is
associated with survival,
self-preservation--
groundedness, connection,
to the feminine, to the Earth.
It's a chakra that is
atrophied for many, many of us
in the West.
Our connection to nature, to
be sustained by the Earth,
by the mother who
will never leave us.
So we go about
addressing these needs
in a very materialistic way.
You're never going
to have enough money.
You're never going to
have enough security.
These are the themes
that we can heal
by reestablishing our connection
to the Earth that provides
all of that we need so
that we live in abundance.
Some of the poorest
people I know
are worth hundreds of
millions of dollars
because they don't have
that sustaining connection
to the Mother.
The second chakra is
related to our sense
of self, our sexuality,
our emotions,
our personal identity.
The third chakra, which is
located at the solar plexus,
is associated with how
the world receives us,
how we're able to express
ourselves in the world,
and manifest our
dreams in the world.
The fourth chakra is the heart.
It's associated with
the higher emotions,
with love, with
freedom, with intimacy.
And sexuality is associated
with the second chakra.
Intimacy doesn't
happen until you
are able to awaken
the fourth chakra.
So in much of our culture,
we see a sexuality devoid
of love, devoid of intimacy.
The fifth chakra, the
throat, is the place
where our psychic and
intuitive abilities reside.
And it creates-- its the
honeycomb, if you would,
that expresses our
dreams in the world.
And this honeycomb,
this latticework
provided by the fifth chakra,
is fueled by the third chakra
to achieve our
dreams in the world,
to have the world respond to us
in a creative and positive way.
The sixth chakra at the
forehead is associated
with our experience of
our personal divine,
of the awakened
mind, of the ability
to see into the
heart of things--
just perceive the luminous
connections with life.
It's the fully
awakened sense of self.
The individual who
has fully-- who
has become whole, who as
matured, who has individuated,
the seventh chakra, at
the very top of the head,
is our connection
with the heavens.
The same way that the
first chakra connect us
to the Earth, the seventh
chakra connects us to the sun,
to the heavens, to the
source of all life.
The eighth chakra
is above our heads,
and is depicted as a radiant
sun that washes us in its light
and in its beauty.
This is a chakra that
exists outside of time.
All of the seven chakras in
our body manifest in time.
The eighth chakra
exists outside of time.
And when we die, this
eighth chakra expands.
It becomes like a
luminous-- a golden egg,
and the seven chakras migrate
up to this eighth chakra,
and then it goes about
creating a new body.
That's the primary job
of this eighth chakra.
And the eighth chakra is the
personal experience of God.
It's where God lives within us.
The ninth chakra, which is also
outside of time and outside
of space, is where
we live within God.
It's what we would call spirit.
The eighth chakra would be
the soul, which is personal.
And then, of course, the ninth
chakra is spirit, which is one.
When the energy field,
the luminous energy field
becomes toxic, we are not
able to recycle waste.
And then the chakras
become clogged.
The chakras, remember,
metabolize energy,
and feed us and sustain us
in a very essential way.
So that when the luminous
system becomes clogged,
the quality of the field
going into our chakras
is very, very low very
low-- very low grade fuel.
So we become dull, our
energy levels drop,
we begin to experience
mood swings,
psychosomatic conditions
get triggered,
and actually genetic
imprints can be activated.
You can have twins, two
sisters, both of which
inherited a predisposition
to breast cancer.
And one sister, with
the toxic field,
will have expressed that cancer.
The one who has a clean luminous
body, the one that is not
toxic, will not have
expressed that condition.
Because these toxins
in the luminous field
overloaded our
immune system and can
catalyze the expression
of degraded conditions.
What happens when we
have a toxic field?
Emotionally, it's
depression, mood swings.
Physically, is a lack of
vital energy, an inability
to sleep well, an inability to
absorb nourishment from food,
and the expression of disease
that would not have expressed
itself had we maintained
our luminous energy
field in good health.
The shaman works with
four levels of reality,
by engaging four
levels of reality.
And I'd like to
briefly describe these.
The first one is
the literal level,
the level of matter of the body.
The second one is the symbolic.
We can call it the mind.
The third is the mythic,
that we could call the soul.
And the fourth is the essential,
that we could call the spirit.
Each of these are like
Russian nesting dolls that
sit inside each other and that
inform the levels within it
so that we know that the
mind informs the body,
the soul informs the mind, and
the spirit informs the soul.
Each of these domains
has its own language.
The language of the body is
physical, chemical, cellular.
The language of
the mind are words.
The language of the
soul are images.
And the language of
spirit is energy.
The gift of the healer
is to be able to engage
each of these levels separately,
to not be confined to one.
For example, medicine
operates strictly
at the level of the
body, psychology
at the level of the mind.
Spiritual teachings of
the level of the soul.
And the very deep
spiritual teaching
is at the level of spirit.
The healer, and the healers
that we're training in the West,
learn how to switch
levels of engagement
so that if you're
working with a client
and they have a pending
engagement with a heart
condition because
they inherited it
from their mother and
their grandmother,
they don't want to have that
encounter at the literal level,
in the emergency room.
You preferably want to have
it at the psychological
or preferably at the
level of the soul,
ideally at the
energetic, where you're
able to clear the imprint
in the luminous energy field
before it has an opportunity
to organize disease.
So the shaman healer is able
to work at all four levels.
The psychologist generally
works only at the level of mind.
And the tools of
the psychologist
are language and feelings.
The shaman is able to work
at the level of the soul.
The tools of the
level of the soul
are images, archetypical images
that are laden with power.
Not just with information,
but with power.
And the language of spirit,
of course, is not even images.
The language of
spirit is energy,
which is the most
fundamental language of all.
There are dangers associated
with energy medicine,
and these are dangers
that are seldom
pointed out by practitioners.
I've had many people
come to my office
after they have seen an energy
healer who has applied energy
to their cancer only
to have their cancer
metastasize
throughout their body.
Because cancer loves energy.
It loves blood flow.
It loves energy.
So we cannot practice energy
healing by treating the symptom
only.
We have to be
very, very careful.
These are extraordinarily
powerful processes
that can disinhibit
the immune response
or it can accelerate
the regrowth
of a cancer in the body.
So there are cautions that
the healers must be aware of,
and that during the course
of your training, as you
experience the power
of these practices,
you become very sensitive
to their appropriate use.
There are four
modalities of healing
that we work with in
four distinct processes.
The first one is the
illumination process.
This is the core
healing process.
And it has to do with
clearing and erasing
imprints in the
luminous energy field
and assisting your
client in having
an experience of infinity,
of stepping outside of time,
of their infinite nature,
of this eighth chakra that
exists outside of
the physical body.
The illumination
process erases imprints
from the luminous energy
field, clears the chakras,
metabolizes toxic
energies in the chakras
so that we can vibrate again
in our original frequencies,
in our original nature.
We can acquire
that rainbow body.
The second process is working
with intrusive energies
or entities.
In the West, we assume that
all of the energies that we
experience belong to us.
In traditional
societies, the healer
understands that
there are energies
that do not belong
to you, that these
are intrusive energies,
and, in some cases,
intrusive entities that do
not belong to your client.
There are two kinds
of intrusive energies.
The first one is thought forms
directed at you-- someone that
feels that you've hurt them,
that you've betrayed them.
That when you feel that you've
been stabbed in the back
by someone.
Now, these are
generally individuals
that we were once close
to-- that young man
or that young woman
that feels that you
left them and destroyed
their lives because you
were the love of their life.
The resentment and the
anger that they feel
can penetrate our
luminous defenses
because we do not
recognize them as foreign.
These are people that we
were once very open to,
that we let in very deeply.
And these energies can
actually embed themselves
in the physical body and become
crystallized and hardened.
And in the jungles,
for example, they
describe these as
spears or arrows, darts,
psychic darts that embed
themselves in the body
and then begin to
transmit their poison,
which is generally in the
form of anger or rage or fear.
Anger and fear-- the two most
deadly poisons in the world.
And we have to extract
these energies manually.
They have to be pulled
out of the physical body.
So this an intrusive energy.
An intrusive entity
is a spirit that
has become attached to someone
and that begins to inform them.
The person begins to assume
the behaviors, the postures,
the addictions, the cravings
of the deceased person.
Now, curiously, we're
finding this also happening
with organ transplants.
Someone who's received a kidney
or a heart-lung transplant
who's never had any
craving for alcohol
suddenly begins to crave
alcohol, or to crave meat,
or to crave smoking.
But what happens with
an intrusive entity
is that 99% of the time it's a
relative who died unconsciously
and who is gravitating
to a loved one
to seek help and assistance.
And even the relative that you
like the least, if they came
to your front door
bloodied from an accident,
you would let them
in long enough
to clean them out and then
invite them out again.
What happens when an
individual dies unconsciously
is that they're trapped
between the worlds.
They're caught in a nightmare
that they can't wake up from.
And they will gravitate to a
loved one-- not necessarily
the most loved one, but the
most psychically open one,
the most spiritually
open person,
and they'll take up
residence with them.
Let me give you an example.
When "Shaman, Healer, Sage"
was about to go to press,
the publisher, Random
House, flew me to New York,
and they invited me to give
a presentation to their sales
force-- the national
sales force.
My talk was after
lunch, and they were not
very interested in
a book on healing.
They were really looking for
the next best-selling novel.
And then a man
walks into the room,
and I see that everyone wakes
up and is looking to him
to see how they should
react to this book.
And he raises his hand and
addresses the sales force.
And he says, you all
know that I generally
do not come to these meetings.
But all of you know that
for the last 10 years,
I've had a problem with alcohol.
And I went to see one
of Alberto's graduates,
and I had two healing
sessions with her.
And that was three
and a half months ago.
And I've not have a
drop of alcohol since,
nor any craving for alcohol.
This really works.
Thank you very much.
And he gets up and he
leaves, and suddenly everyone
is interested because just
about everyone in publishing
in New York has a
problem with alcohol.
And I called our
graduate, and I asked her,
what did you do with this man?
And she says, well, when
he walked in to see me,
he walked in the door.
Right behind him was
his father's spirit.
His father had died
10 years earlier.
His father had been an
alcoholic all his life
and had been with her
client, with this man,
for the last 10 years.
And I asked, what did you do?
She said I helped him die.
I helped him to die.
The minute that he
disengaged from the client,
he was able to stop drinking.
Now, this was my editor's
boss's boss's boss.
So it's-- it was some big angel
that sent this man into this
meeting.
But it's powerful.
Whenever I speak about this
to, say, in psychology meetings
or in medical
meetings, everybody
begins to cringe a
little bit because this
is a taboo subject.
You don't talk about this.
But there's no amount
of psychotherapy,
there's no amount
of medicine that
is going to help when you have
an intrusive energy or spirit
causing disease in your client.
Whereas the interventions that
we work with energetically
are tremendously effective.
Because we not only want
to extract the spirit that
could be uncle
Martin, but we want
to assist him in his crossing--
help him to die consciously,
help him be received with
love and with compassion,
and be filled with light.
The third process we work with
is the soul retrieval process.
Now, all of these are founded
on the illumination process,
on clearing imprints from
the luminous energy field.
The soul retrieval
process, in which
the healer journeys
on behalf of a client
to help them recover
a soul part that
was lost as a result
of trauma or pain,
the soul retrieval
can accomplish
in a couple of
sessions what can take
years to do in psychotherapy.
Where in psychotherapy you're
retrieving the understanding
of why this happened,
how it happened.
In soul retrieval,
you're actually
recovering a quanta of energy,
a vital life force-- not
the information, but the
energy and reinstalling
that as essential resources
that your clients need in order
to heal.
You're retrieving the energy and
reinstalling it in the client
psyche, transmitting
it to the client.
There are two kinds
of soul retrieval
that we teach our
students to work with.
The first one is journeying
along the client's timeline
into the past to discover
an original wound.
And the premise here
is that every wound
that we have had in our
lives-- every time that we've
experienced suffering
or pain-- has
been a replay of
this original wound.
It's been version number 27
of this original wounding.
In our mythology,
of course, this
is described as
our original sin.
But individually, there's
also an original wounding
that the shaman is able to
travel back along timeline,
identify, and help heal.
The second kind
of soul retrieval
is where we travel
forward along a timeline
and do a destiny retrieval,
where our students
learn to work with
the client to help
them access a future state.
It might be a
future healed state,
or it might be a state in which
they have reinvented themselves
in a creative positive
engagement with life.
So for example, when
I write a new book,
I do a destiny retrieval.
I track time forward,
access the complete book
so it can begin
informing me now.
Let me give you a story
that illustrates this,
because it's a very
powerful teaching tool that
is relatively
unknown in the West.
I had a client who was a
physicist at the Stanford
Linear Accelerator.
And they were studying
the age of the universe.
They were trying to
determine if there
was enough mass in
the universe for it
to continue expanding
forever or if it
was going to begin
to collapse back
onto itself in a kind
of reverse Big Bang.
And this is very
important information.
We're fascinated by the
questions of this sort.
And he calls me a few
months after I met him,
and I asked him, Steve, what's
the prognosis for the universe?
And he says, well,
it looks good.
It looks like there is
enough mass for the universe
to continue expanding forever.
But the prognosis is
not so good for me.
I've just been diagnosed with
stage four terminal cancer.
And I've been given
four months to live.
So he described a condition
in which 98% of the people
diagnosed with this illness
died within four months.
So we had to track
through that 2% window
to find the future
healed state that
could begin to inform him now.
Because right now, his body
was being informed exclusively
by this diseased state.
So we did a destiny retrieval.
After working together
for two months,
we were able to access
the future healed state
where Steve was disease-free.
And eight months
later, I ended up
marrying him to his new bride.
And he outlived his prognosis
by more than 10 years.
And there's a group
of Hopi elders
that sit in
meditation envisioning
the possible healed
state for the Earth.
Not the probable
healed state-- we
know what the
probable state will
be-- but the possible one,
no matter how improbable.
And they believe that
the act of seeing it
helps to make it a
little bit more probable.
The fourth healing
process that we work with
are the death rites,
which we have largely
forgotten in the West.
There's no greater gift that
you can give to a loved one--
perhaps the person who
brought you into this world--
than to assist them in
their greatest journey.
And the death rites
allow us to be
an island of calm in
the middle of a storm.
It is the most
terrifying thing that
can happened to someone
who's not prepared,
and very few of us
learn the practices
of stillness and
surrender and love
that are required for
us to die consciously.
So the death rites assist
us in helping a loved one
to make their journey across.
And they have to do with
learning to disengage
the luminous energy field so
that the luminous body does not
remain attached to the
physical body after death,
and learning to seal the chakras
so the luminous body cannot
reenter the physical body.
And in assisting our
loved one in coming
to peace with their life
history through the illumination
process-- illuminating
each one of the chakras
so that they are not held in
bondage by any of the pain
inflicted upon them
in the past or pain
that they may have inadvertently
inflicted on others.
So that there's no
karma that's been left.
The death rites are
essential to us in the West.
I remember when my
father was passing.
He was in the hospital,
and he was in a coma.
And my sister and I had gone to
the cafeteria for a sandwich.
When we came back, his
vital signs had stopped.
And a young priest
was there performing
the Catholic last
rites, where you
make the sign of the cross
over each of the chakras.
And I walk into the
room and I'm horrified.
And I take the priest and
I usher him out the door.
And I lock the door, and I
disengage my father's chakras,
one by one, beginning
at the heart,
and then help his
luminous body separate
from his physical body.
My mother and my sister
were crying, were in tears.
As soon as his luminous body
separated from the physical,
we all began to laugh in joy.
The room changed from a
hospital room into a cathedral.
And then we went and
sealed the chakras,
the same way the
priest was doing,
but after we set the
luminous body free.
Because the priest had forgotten
the origin of these rites,
and was actually
sealing that luminous
body in the physical body.
Death is a natural process.
Our bodies know how
to die in the same way
that we know how to be born.
But if you're having
a natural childbirth,
you preferably want to do
it in a hospital, where
in case something
goes wrong, you
have access to medical help.
That one out of 10, that
doesn't happen naturally.
Similarly with the death rites.
Nine out of 10
people die gracefully
and are able to journey through
the axis of the luminous energy
field, the center
of that doughnut,
back to the world of spirit.
But it's that one out of 10
that you want to be able to be
present for so that they are
not caught in this realm between
the worlds, in the nightmare
that they cannot wake up from.
So that they're
able to journey back
into the light in
a loving manner.
These are the four
key processes,
but they all happen within the
context of the illumination
process, of the
experience of infinity.
Until we're able to
honor our ancestors,
they continue to
live through us.
So we need to elevate them and
put them in the ancestral altar
so that they're not running
loose around our lives
and wreaking havoc in them.
And we do that by
elevating them--
by remembering them in the
way that they would have liked
us to remember them,
not only in the way
they hurt us or
they traumatized us.
And in this way, we
heal the ancestor wound,
and we assist them in
continuing in their journey
back to the spirit world.
We do not keep them bound
to us and to possible pain
that they experience with us.
We set them free.
In setting them free,
we set ourselves
free as well, so
that we do not need
to continue living their lives.
I do not need to live my
father's life, or rebel
against it.
So I set him free.
The rainbow body
is the terminology
used by native elders that
speaks about an individual who
has healed their seven chakras.
When we are wounded or when we
carry trauma or toxic energies
in our systems, our
chakras become dulled,
and their original colors
not available to them.
So when we go undergo
our healing process,
each chakra is able to reflect
perfectly its natural color,
and we end up with the
seven colors of the rainbow.
Throughout the
Americas, there are
groups of indigenous
peoples that
are keepers of a
body of prophecy
that talks about the upheavals
that are happening in the Earth
today.
The prophecies for
the Inca are known
as the prophecies of Pachacuti.
Pachacuti means the
Earth being turned over,
being turned upside down.
And they speak about this
time that we're living in,
until the year 2012, as being a
time of mulching and upheaval.
They speak about the possible
extinction of humanity
and about the emergence of
a new human in the Earth.
I personally believe that
this is already taking place,
that the human
species, as we know it,
is becoming extinct--
has become extinct.
Because in the last 50
years, Western medicine
has undone the last
50,000 years of evolution
by saving the lives of
weak and infirm children
that nature would not have
otherwise selected to survive.
Because in the last 50 years,
we have reduced infant mortality
from nearly 35% to 5% or 6%.
We're selecting to save the
lives of children, including
myself, that nature
would not have otherwise
selected to survive.
So we're a species that has
been set adrift in creation.
We're no longer being guided
by the hand of nature.
We have begun to self-select.
So the prophecies
speak about a new human
being born on the planet today.
I believe that we
have the opportunity
to become that new human
in our generation--
to become a new species,
to become homoluminous,
no longer homosapiens.
And I believe that
today the question
is not can we, but dare
we take that quantum
leap into who we
are becoming today?